docs/contributing.rst, before:

############
Contributing
############

Help is always appreciated!

To get started, you can try :ref:`building-from-source` in order to familiarize
yourself with the components of Solidity and the build process. Also, it may be
useful to become well-versed at writing smart-contracts in Solidity.

In particular, we need help in the following areas:

* Improving the documentation
* Responding to questions from other users on `StackExchange
  <https://ethereum.stackexchange.com>`_ and the `Solidity Gitter
  <https://gitter.im/ethereum/solidity>`_
* Fixing and responding to `Solidity's GitHub issues
  <https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues>`_, especially those tagged as
  `good first issue <https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/labels/good%20first%20issue>`_ which are
  meant as introductory issues for external contributors.

Please note that this project is released with a `Contributor Code of Conduct <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ethereum/solidity/develop/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md>`_. By participating in this project - in the issues, pull requests, or Gitter channels - you agree to abide by its terms.

How to Report Issues
====================

To report an issue, please use the
`GitHub issues tracker <https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues>`_. When
reporting issues, please mention the following details:

* Which version of Solidity you are using
* What was the source code (if applicable)
* Which platform are you running on
* How to reproduce the issue
* What was the result of the issue
* What the expected behaviour is

Reducing the source code that caused the issue to a bare minimum is always
very helpful and sometimes even clarifies a misunderstanding.

Workflow for Pull Requests
==========================

In order to contribute, please fork off of the ``develop`` branch and make your
changes there. Your commit messages should detail *why* you made your change
in addition to *what* you did (unless it is a tiny change).

If you need to pull in any changes from ``develop`` after making your fork (for
example, to resolve potential merge conflicts), please avoid using ``git merge``
and instead, ``git rebase`` your branch. This will help us review your change
more easily.

Additionally, if you are writing a new feature, please ensure you add appropriate
test cases under ``test/`` (see below).

However, if you are making a larger change, please consult with the `Solidity Development Gitter channel
<https://gitter.im/ethereum/solidity-dev>`_ (different from the one mentioned above, this one is
focused on compiler and language development instead of language use) first.

New features and bugfixes should be added to the ``Changelog.md`` file: please
follow the style of previous entries, when applicable.

Finally, please make sure you respect the `coding style
<https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/CODING_STYLE.md>`_
for this project. Also, even though we do CI testing, please test your code and
ensure that it builds locally before submitting a pull request.

Thank you for your help!

Running the compiler tests
==========================

The ``./scripts/tests.sh`` script executes most Solidity tests and
runs ``aleth`` automatically if it is in the path. The script does not download it,
so you need to install it first. Please read on for the details.

Solidity includes different types of tests, most of them bundled into the `Boost C++ Test Framework <https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_69_0/libs/test/doc/html/index.html>`_ application ``soltest``.
Some of them require the ``aleth`` client in testing mode, others require ``libz3``.

To run a basic set of tests that require neither ``aleth`` nor ``libz3``, run
``./scripts/soltest.sh --no-ipc --no-smt``.

``./build/test/soltest --help`` has extensive help on all of the options available.
See especially:

- `show_progress (-p) <https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_69_0/libs/test/doc/html/boost_test/utf_reference/rt_param_reference/show_progress.html>`_ to show test completion,
- `run_test (-t) <https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_69_0/libs/test/doc/html/boost_test/utf_reference/rt_param_reference/run_test.html>`_ to run specific tests cases, and
- `report-level (-r) <https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_69_0/libs/test/doc/html/boost_test/utf_reference/rt_param_reference/report_level.html>`_ give a more detailed report.

.. note ::

    Those working in a Windows environment wanting to run the above basic sets without aleth or libz3 in Git Bash, you would have to do: ``./build/test/Release/soltest.exe -- --no-ipc --no-smt``.
    If you're running this in plain Command Prompt, use ``.\build\test\Release\soltest.exe -- --no-ipc --no-smt``.

The option ``--no-smt`` disables the tests that require ``libz3`` and
``--no-ipc`` disables those that require ``aleth``.

If you want to run the ipc tests (that test the semantics of the generated code),
you need to install `aleth <https://github.com/ethereum/aleth/releases/download/v1.6.0/aleth-1.6.0-linux-x86_64.tar.gz>`_ and run it in testing mode: ``aleth --db memorydb --test -d /tmp/testeth``.

To run the actual tests, use: ``./scripts/soltest.sh --ipcpath /tmp/testeth/geth.ipc``.

To run a subset of tests, you can use filters:
``./scripts/soltest.sh -t TestSuite/TestName --ipcpath /tmp/testeth/geth.ipc``,
where ``TestName`` can be a wildcard ``*``.

For example, here's an example test you might run;
``./scripts/soltest.sh -t "yulOptimizerTests/disambiguator/*" --no-ipc --no-smt``.
This will test all the tests for the disambiguator.

To get a list of all tests, use
``./build/test/soltest --list_content=HRF -- --ipcpath /tmp/irrelevant``.

If you want to debug using GDB, make sure you build differently than the "usual".
For example, you could run the following command in your ``build`` folder:
::

   cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug ..
   make

This will create symbols such that when you debug a test using the ``--debug`` flag, you will have access to functions and variables in which you can break or print with.


The script ``./scripts/tests.sh`` also runs commandline tests and compilation tests
in addition to those found in ``soltest``.

The CI runs additional tests (including ``solc-js`` and testing third party Solidity frameworks) that require compiling the Emscripten target.

.. note ::

    Some versions of ``aleth`` can not be used for testing. We suggest using
    the same version that the Solidity continuous integration tests use.
    Currently the CI uses version ``1.6.0`` of ``aleth``.

Writing and running syntax tests
--------------------------------

Syntax tests check that the compiler generates the correct error messages for invalid code
and properly accepts valid code.
They are stored in individual files inside the ``tests/libsolidity/syntaxTests`` folder.
These files must contain annotations, stating the expected result(s) of the respective test.
The test suite compiles and checks them against the given expectations.

For example: ``./test/libsolidity/syntaxTests/double_stateVariable_declaration.sol``

::

    contract test {
        uint256 variable;
        uint128 variable;
    }
    // ----
    // DeclarationError: (36-52): Identifier already declared.

A syntax test must contain at least the contract under test itself, followed by the separator ``// ----``. The comments that follow the separator are used to describe the
expected compiler errors or warnings. The number range denotes the location in the source where the error occurred.
If you want the contract to compile without any errors or warning you can leave
out the separator and the comments that follow it.

In the above example, the state variable ``variable`` was declared twice, which is not allowed. This results in a ``DeclarationError`` stating that the identifier was already declared.

The ``isoltest`` tool is used for these tests and you can find it under ``./build/test/tools/``. It is an interactive tool which allows
editing of failing contracts using your preferred text editor. Let's try to break this test by removing the second declaration of ``variable``:

::

    contract test {
        uint256 variable;
    }
    // ----
    // DeclarationError: (36-52): Identifier already declared.

Running ``./build/test/isoltest`` again results in a test failure:

::

    syntaxTests/double_stateVariable_declaration.sol: FAIL
        Contract:
            contract test {
                uint256 variable;
            }

        Expected result:
            DeclarationError: (36-52): Identifier already declared.
        Obtained result:
            Success


``isoltest`` prints the expected result next to the obtained result, and also
provides a way to edit, update or skip the current contract file, or quit the application.

It offers several options for failing tests:

- ``edit``: ``isoltest`` tries to open the contract in an editor so you can adjust it. It either uses the editor given on the command line (as ``isoltest --editor /path/to/editor``), in the environment variable ``EDITOR`` or just ``/usr/bin/editor`` (in that order).
- ``update``: Updates the expectations for contract under test. This updates the annotations by removing unmet expectations and adding missing expectations. The test is then run again.
- ``skip``: Skips the execution of this particular test.
- ``quit``: Quits ``isoltest``.

All of these options apply to the current contract, expect ``quit`` which stops the entire testing process.

Automatically updating the test above changes it to

::

    contract test {
        uint256 variable;
    }
    // ----

and re-run the test. It now passes again:

::

    Re-running test case...
    syntaxTests/double_stateVariable_declaration.sol: OK


.. note::

    Choose a name for the contract file that explains what it tests, e.g. ``double_variable_declaration.sol``.
    Do not put more than one contract into a single file, unless you are testing inheritance or cross-contract calls.
    Each file should test one aspect of your new feature.


Running the Fuzzer via AFL
==========================

Fuzzing is a technique that runs programs on more or less random inputs to find exceptional execution
states (segmentation faults, exceptions, etc). Modern fuzzers are clever and run a directed search
inside the input. We have a specialized binary called ``solfuzzer`` which takes source code as input
and fails whenever it encounters an internal compiler error, segmentation fault or similar, but
does not fail if e.g., the code contains an error. This way, fuzzing tools can find internal problems in the compiler.

We mainly use `AFL <http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/>`_ for fuzzing. You need to download and
install the AFL packages from your repositories (afl, afl-clang) or build them manually.
Next, build Solidity (or just the ``solfuzzer`` binary) with AFL as your compiler:

::

    cd build
    # if needed
    make clean
    cmake .. -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=path/to/afl-gcc -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=path/to/afl-g++
    make solfuzzer

At this stage you should be able to see a message similar to the following:

::

    Scanning dependencies of target solfuzzer
    [ 98%] Building CXX object test/tools/CMakeFiles/solfuzzer.dir/fuzzer.cpp.o
    afl-cc 2.52b by <lcamtuf@google.com>
    afl-as 2.52b by <lcamtuf@google.com>
    [+] Instrumented 1949 locations (64-bit, non-hardened mode, ratio 100%).
    [100%] Linking CXX executable solfuzzer

If the instrumentation messages did not appear, try switching the cmake flags pointing to AFL's clang binaries:

::

    # if previously failed
    make clean
    cmake .. -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=path/to/afl-clang -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=path/to/afl-clang++
    make solfuzzer

Otherwise, upon execution the fuzzer halts with an error saying binary is not instrumented:

::

    afl-fuzz 2.52b by <lcamtuf@google.com>
    ... (truncated messages)
    [*] Validating target binary...

    [-] Looks like the target binary is not instrumented! The fuzzer depends on
        compile-time instrumentation to isolate interesting test cases while
        mutating the input data. For more information, and for tips on how to
        instrument binaries, please see /usr/share/doc/afl-doc/docs/README.

        When source code is not available, you may be able to leverage QEMU
        mode support. Consult the README for tips on how to enable this.
        (It is also possible to use afl-fuzz as a traditional, "dumb" fuzzer.
        For that, you can use the -n option - but expect much worse results.)

    [-] PROGRAM ABORT : No instrumentation detected
             Location : check_binary(), afl-fuzz.c:6920


Next, you need some example source files. This makes it much easier for the fuzzer
to find errors. You can either copy some files from the syntax tests or extract test files
from the documentation or the other tests:

::

    mkdir /tmp/test_cases
    cd /tmp/test_cases
    # extract from tests:
    path/to/solidity/scripts/isolate_tests.py path/to/solidity/test/libsolidity/SolidityEndToEndTest.cpp
    # extract from documentation:
    path/to/solidity/scripts/isolate_tests.py path/to/solidity/docs docs

The AFL documentation states that the corpus (the initial input files) should not be
too large. The files themselves should not be larger than 1 kB and there should be
at most one input file per functionality, so better start with a small number of.
There is also a tool called ``afl-cmin`` that can trim input files
that result in similar behaviour of the binary.

Now run the fuzzer (the ``-m`` extends the size of memory to 60 MB):

::

    afl-fuzz -m 60 -i /tmp/test_cases -o /tmp/fuzzer_reports -- /path/to/solfuzzer

The fuzzer creates source files that lead to failures in ``/tmp/fuzzer_reports``.
Often it finds many similar source files that produce the same error. You can
use the tool ``scripts/uniqueErrors.sh`` to filter out the unique errors.

Whiskers
========

*Whiskers* is a string templating system similar to `Mustache <https://mustache.github.io>`_. It is used by the
compiler in various places to aid readability, and thus maintainability and verifiability, of the code.

The syntax comes with a substantial difference to Mustache. The template markers ``{{`` and ``}}`` are
replaced by ``<`` and ``>`` in order to aid parsing and avoid conflicts with :ref:`inline-assembly`
(The symbols ``<`` and ``>`` are invalid in inline assembly, while ``{`` and ``}`` are used to delimit blocks).
Another limitation is that lists are only resolved one depth and they do not recurse. This may change in the future.

A rough specification is the following:

Any occurrence of ``<name>`` is replaced by the string-value of the supplied variable ``name`` without any
escaping and without iterated replacements. An area can be delimited by ``<#name>...</name>``. It is replaced
by as many concatenations of its contents as there were sets of variables supplied to the template system,
each time replacing any ``<inner>`` items by their respective value. Top-level variables can also be used
inside such areas.

.. _documentation-style:

Documentation Style Guide
=========================

The following are style recommendations specifically for documentation
contributions to Solidity.

English Language
----------------

Use English, with British English spelling preferred, unless using project or brand names. Try to reduce the usage of
local slang and references, making your language as clear to all readers as possible. Below are some references to help:

* `Simplified technical English <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simplified_Technical_English>`_
* `International English <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_English>`_
* `British English spelling <https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/spelling/british-and-spelling>`_


.. note::

    While the official Solidity documentation is written in English, there are community contributed :ref:`translations`
    in other languages available.

Title Case for Headings
-----------------------

Use `title case <http://titlecase.com>`_ for headings. This means capitalise all principal words in
titles, but not articles, conjunctions, and prepositions unless they start the
title.

For example, the following are all correct:

* Title Case for Headings
* For Headings Use Title Case
* Local and State Variable Names
* Order of Layout

Expand Contractions
-------------------

Use expanded contractions for words, for example:

* "Do not" instead of "Don't".
* "Can not" instead of "Can't".

Active and Passive Voice
------------------------

Active voice is typically recommended for tutorial style documentation as it
helps the reader understand who or what is performing a task. However, as the
Solidity documentation is a mixture of tutorials and reference content, passive
voice is sometimes more applicable.

As a summary:

* Use passive voice for technical reference, for example language definition and internals of the Ethereum VM.
* Use active voice when describing recommendations on how to apply an aspect of Solidity.

For example, the below is in passive voice as it specifies an aspect of Solidity:

  Functions can be declared ``pure`` in which case they promise not to read
  from or modify the state.

For example, the below is in active voice as it discusses an application of Solidity:

  When invoking the compiler, you can specify how to discover the first element
  of a path, and also path prefix remappings.

Common Terms
------------

* "Function parameters" and "return variables", not input and output parameters.

Code Examples
-------------

A CI process tests all code block formatted code examples that begin with ``pragma solidity``, ``contract``, ``library``
or ``interface`` using the ``./test/cmdlineTests.sh`` script when you create a PR. If you are adding new code examples,
ensure they work and pass tests before creating the PR.

Ensure that all code examples begin with a ``pragma`` version that spans the largest where the contract code is valid.
For example ``pragma solidity >=0.4.0 <0.7.0;``.

Running Documentation Tests
---------------------------

Make sure your contributions pass our documentation tests by running ``./scripts/docs.sh`` that installs dependencies
needed for documentation and checks for any problems such as broken links or syntax issues.

Commit message:

Remove traces of aleth and IPC.

docs/contributing.rst, after:

############
Contributing
############

Help is always appreciated!

To get started, you can try :ref:`building-from-source` in order to familiarize
yourself with the components of Solidity and the build process. Also, it may be
useful to become well-versed at writing smart-contracts in Solidity.

In particular, we need help in the following areas:

* Improving the documentation
* Responding to questions from other users on `StackExchange
  <https://ethereum.stackexchange.com>`_ and the `Solidity Gitter
  <https://gitter.im/ethereum/solidity>`_
* Fixing and responding to `Solidity's GitHub issues
  <https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues>`_, especially those tagged as
  `good first issue <https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/labels/good%20first%20issue>`_ which are
  meant as introductory issues for external contributors.

Please note that this project is released with a `Contributor Code of Conduct <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ethereum/solidity/develop/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md>`_. By participating in this project - in the issues, pull requests, or Gitter channels - you agree to abide by its terms.

How to Report Issues
====================

To report an issue, please use the
`GitHub issues tracker <https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues>`_. When
reporting issues, please mention the following details:

* Which version of Solidity you are using
* What was the source code (if applicable)
* Which platform are you running on
* How to reproduce the issue
* What was the result of the issue
* What the expected behaviour is

Reducing the source code that caused the issue to a bare minimum is always
very helpful and sometimes even clarifies a misunderstanding.

Workflow for Pull Requests
==========================

In order to contribute, please fork off of the ``develop`` branch and make your
changes there. Your commit messages should detail *why* you made your change
in addition to *what* you did (unless it is a tiny change).

If you need to pull in any changes from ``develop`` after making your fork (for
example, to resolve potential merge conflicts), please avoid using ``git merge``
and instead, ``git rebase`` your branch. This will help us review your change
more easily.

Additionally, if you are writing a new feature, please ensure you add appropriate
test cases under ``test/`` (see below).

However, if you are making a larger change, please consult with the `Solidity Development Gitter channel
<https://gitter.im/ethereum/solidity-dev>`_ (different from the one mentioned above, this one is
focused on compiler and language development instead of language use) first.

New features and bugfixes should be added to the ``Changelog.md`` file: please
follow the style of previous entries, when applicable.

Finally, please make sure you respect the `coding style
<https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/CODING_STYLE.md>`_
for this project. Also, even though we do CI testing, please test your code and
ensure that it builds locally before submitting a pull request.

Thank you for your help!

Running the compiler tests
==========================

The ``./scripts/tests.sh`` script executes most Solidity tests automatically,
but for quicker feedback, you might want to run specific tests.

Solidity includes different types of tests, most of them bundled into the
`Boost C++ Test Framework <https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_69_0/libs/test/doc/html/index.html>`_ application ``soltest``.
Running ``build/test/soltest` or its wrapper ``scripts/soltest.sh`` is sufficient for most changes.

Some tests require the ``libevmone.so`` library, others require ``libz3``.

The test system will automatically try to discover the location of ``libevmone.so``
starting from the current directory. If it does not find it, the relevant tests
are skipped. To run all tests, download the library from
`Github <https://github.com/ethereum/evmone/releases/download/v0.1.0/evmone-0.1.0-linux-x86_64.tar.gz>`_
and either place it in the project root path or inside the ``deps`` folder.

If you do not have libz3 installed on your system, you should disable the SMT tests:
``./scripts/soltest.sh --no-smt``.

``./build/test/soltest --help`` has extensive help on all of the options available.
See especially:

- `show_progress (-p) <https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_69_0/libs/test/doc/html/boost_test/utf_reference/rt_param_reference/show_progress.html>`_ to show test completion,
- `run_test (-t) <https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_69_0/libs/test/doc/html/boost_test/utf_reference/rt_param_reference/run_test.html>`_ to run specific tests cases, and
- `report-level (-r) <https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_69_0/libs/test/doc/html/boost_test/utf_reference/rt_param_reference/report_level.html>`_ give a more detailed report.

.. note ::

    Those working in a Windows environment wanting to run the above basic sets without libz3 in Git Bash, you would have to do: ``./build/test/Release/soltest.exe -- --no-smt``.
    If you are running this in plain Command Prompt, use ``.\build\test\Release\soltest.exe -- --no-smt``.

To run a subset of tests, you can use filters:
``./scripts/soltest.sh -t TestSuite/TestName,
where ``TestName`` can be a wildcard ``*``.

For example, here is an example test you might run;
``./scripts/soltest.sh -t "yulOptimizerTests/disambiguator/*" --no-smt``.
This will test all the tests for the disambiguator.

To get a list of all tests, use
``./build/test/soltest --list_content=HRF``.

If you want to debug using GDB, make sure you build differently than the "usual".
For example, you could run the following command in your ``build`` folder:
::

   cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug ..
   make

This will create symbols such that when you debug a test using the ``--debug`` flag, you will have access to functions and variables in which you can break or print with.


The script ``./scripts/tests.sh`` also runs commandline tests and compilation tests
in addition to those found in ``soltest``.

The CI runs additional tests (including ``solc-js`` and testing third party Solidity frameworks) that require compiling the Emscripten target.


Writing and running syntax tests
--------------------------------

Syntax tests check that the compiler generates the correct error messages for invalid code
and properly accepts valid code.
They are stored in individual files inside the ``tests/libsolidity/syntaxTests`` folder.
These files must contain annotations, stating the expected result(s) of the respective test.
The test suite compiles and checks them against the given expectations.

For example: ``./test/libsolidity/syntaxTests/double_stateVariable_declaration.sol``

::

    contract test {
        uint256 variable;
        uint128 variable;
    }
    // ----
    // DeclarationError: (36-52): Identifier already declared.

A syntax test must contain at least the contract under test itself, followed by the separator ``// ----``. The comments that follow the separator are used to describe the
expected compiler errors or warnings. The number range denotes the location in the source where the error occurred.
If you want the contract to compile without any errors or warning you can leave
out the separator and the comments that follow it.

In the above example, the state variable ``variable`` was declared twice, which is not allowed. This results in a ``DeclarationError`` stating that the identifier was already declared.

The ``isoltest`` tool is used for these tests and you can find it under ``./build/test/tools/``. It is an interactive tool which allows
editing of failing contracts using your preferred text editor. Let's try to break this test by removing the second declaration of ``variable``:

::

    contract test {
        uint256 variable;
    }
    // ----
    // DeclarationError: (36-52): Identifier already declared.

Running ``./build/test/isoltest`` again results in a test failure:

::

    syntaxTests/double_stateVariable_declaration.sol: FAIL
        Contract:
            contract test {
                uint256 variable;
            }

        Expected result:
            DeclarationError: (36-52): Identifier already declared.
        Obtained result:
            Success


``isoltest`` prints the expected result next to the obtained result, and also
provides a way to edit, update or skip the current contract file, or quit the application.

It offers several options for failing tests:

- ``edit``: ``isoltest`` tries to open the contract in an editor so you can adjust it. It either uses the editor given on the command line (as ``isoltest --editor /path/to/editor``), in the environment variable ``EDITOR`` or just ``/usr/bin/editor`` (in that order).
- ``update``: Updates the expectations for contract under test. This updates the annotations by removing unmet expectations and adding missing expectations. The test is then run again.
- ``skip``: Skips the execution of this particular test.
- ``quit``: Quits ``isoltest``.

All of these options apply to the current contract, expect ``quit`` which stops the entire testing process.

Automatically updating the test above changes it to

::

    contract test {
        uint256 variable;
    }
    // ----

and re-run the test. It now passes again:

::

    Re-running test case...
    syntaxTests/double_stateVariable_declaration.sol: OK


.. note::

    Choose a name for the contract file that explains what it tests, e.g. ``double_variable_declaration.sol``.
    Do not put more than one contract into a single file, unless you are testing inheritance or cross-contract calls.
    Each file should test one aspect of your new feature.


Running the Fuzzer via AFL
==========================

Fuzzing is a technique that runs programs on more or less random inputs to find exceptional execution
states (segmentation faults, exceptions, etc). Modern fuzzers are clever and run a directed search
inside the input. We have a specialized binary called ``solfuzzer`` which takes source code as input
and fails whenever it encounters an internal compiler error, segmentation fault or similar, but
does not fail if e.g., the code contains an error. This way, fuzzing tools can find internal problems in the compiler.

We mainly use `AFL <http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/>`_ for fuzzing. You need to download and
install the AFL packages from your repositories (afl, afl-clang) or build them manually.
Next, build Solidity (or just the ``solfuzzer`` binary) with AFL as your compiler:

::

    cd build
    # if needed
    make clean
    cmake .. -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=path/to/afl-gcc -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=path/to/afl-g++
    make solfuzzer

At this stage you should be able to see a message similar to the following:

::

    Scanning dependencies of target solfuzzer
    [ 98%] Building CXX object test/tools/CMakeFiles/solfuzzer.dir/fuzzer.cpp.o
    afl-cc 2.52b by <lcamtuf@google.com>
    afl-as 2.52b by <lcamtuf@google.com>
    [+] Instrumented 1949 locations (64-bit, non-hardened mode, ratio 100%).
    [100%] Linking CXX executable solfuzzer

If the instrumentation messages did not appear, try switching the cmake flags pointing to AFL's clang binaries:

::

    # if previously failed
    make clean
    cmake .. -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=path/to/afl-clang -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=path/to/afl-clang++
    make solfuzzer

Otherwise, upon execution the fuzzer halts with an error saying binary is not instrumented:

::

    afl-fuzz 2.52b by <lcamtuf@google.com>
    ... (truncated messages)
    [*] Validating target binary...

    [-] Looks like the target binary is not instrumented! The fuzzer depends on
        compile-time instrumentation to isolate interesting test cases while
        mutating the input data. For more information, and for tips on how to
        instrument binaries, please see /usr/share/doc/afl-doc/docs/README.

        When source code is not available, you may be able to leverage QEMU
        mode support. Consult the README for tips on how to enable this.
        (It is also possible to use afl-fuzz as a traditional, "dumb" fuzzer.
        For that, you can use the -n option - but expect much worse results.)

    [-] PROGRAM ABORT : No instrumentation detected
             Location : check_binary(), afl-fuzz.c:6920


Next, you need some example source files. This makes it much easier for the fuzzer
to find errors. You can either copy some files from the syntax tests or extract test files
from the documentation or the other tests:

::

    mkdir /tmp/test_cases
    cd /tmp/test_cases
    # extract from tests:
    path/to/solidity/scripts/isolate_tests.py path/to/solidity/test/libsolidity/SolidityEndToEndTest.cpp
    # extract from documentation:
    path/to/solidity/scripts/isolate_tests.py path/to/solidity/docs docs

The AFL documentation states that the corpus (the initial input files) should not be
too large. The files themselves should not be larger than 1 kB and there should be
at most one input file per functionality, so better start with a small number of.
There is also a tool called ``afl-cmin`` that can trim input files
that result in similar behaviour of the binary.

Now run the fuzzer (the ``-m`` extends the size of memory to 60 MB):

::

    afl-fuzz -m 60 -i /tmp/test_cases -o /tmp/fuzzer_reports -- /path/to/solfuzzer

The fuzzer creates source files that lead to failures in ``/tmp/fuzzer_reports``.
Often it finds many similar source files that produce the same error. You can
use the tool ``scripts/uniqueErrors.sh`` to filter out the unique errors.

Whiskers
========

*Whiskers* is a string templating system similar to `Mustache <https://mustache.github.io>`_. It is used by the
compiler in various places to aid readability, and thus maintainability and verifiability, of the code.

The syntax comes with a substantial difference to Mustache. The template markers ``{{`` and ``}}`` are
replaced by ``<`` and ``>`` in order to aid parsing and avoid conflicts with :ref:`inline-assembly`
(The symbols ``<`` and ``>`` are invalid in inline assembly, while ``{`` and ``}`` are used to delimit blocks).
Another limitation is that lists are only resolved one depth and they do not recurse. This may change in the future.

A rough specification is the following:

Any occurrence of ``<name>`` is replaced by the string-value of the supplied variable ``name`` without any
escaping and without iterated replacements. An area can be delimited by ``<#name>...</name>``. It is replaced
by as many concatenations of its contents as there were sets of variables supplied to the template system,
each time replacing any ``<inner>`` items by their respective value. Top-level variables can also be used
inside such areas.

.. _documentation-style:

Documentation Style Guide
=========================

The following are style recommendations specifically for documentation
contributions to Solidity.

English Language
----------------

Use English, with British English spelling preferred, unless using project or brand names. Try to reduce the usage of
local slang and references, making your language as clear to all readers as possible. Below are some references to help:

* `Simplified technical English <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simplified_Technical_English>`_
* `International English <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_English>`_
* `British English spelling <https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/spelling/british-and-spelling>`_


.. note::

    While the official Solidity documentation is written in English, there are community contributed :ref:`translations`
    in other languages available.

Title Case for Headings
-----------------------

Use `title case <http://titlecase.com>`_ for headings. This means capitalise all principal words in
titles, but not articles, conjunctions, and prepositions unless they start the
title.

For example, the following are all correct:

* Title Case for Headings
* For Headings Use Title Case
* Local and State Variable Names
* Order of Layout

Expand Contractions
-------------------

Use expanded contractions for words, for example:

* "Do not" instead of "Don't".
* "Can not" instead of "Can't".

Active and Passive Voice
------------------------

Active voice is typically recommended for tutorial style documentation as it
helps the reader understand who or what is performing a task. However, as the
Solidity documentation is a mixture of tutorials and reference content, passive
voice is sometimes more applicable.

As a summary:

* Use passive voice for technical reference, for example language definition and internals of the Ethereum VM.
* Use active voice when describing recommendations on how to apply an aspect of Solidity.

For example, the below is in passive voice as it specifies an aspect of Solidity:

  Functions can be declared ``pure`` in which case they promise not to read
  from or modify the state.

For example, the below is in active voice as it discusses an application of Solidity:

  When invoking the compiler, you can specify how to discover the first element
  of a path, and also path prefix remappings.

Common Terms
------------

* "Function parameters" and "return variables", not input and output parameters.

Code Examples
-------------

A CI process tests all code block formatted code examples that begin with ``pragma solidity``, ``contract``, ``library``
or ``interface`` using the ``./test/cmdlineTests.sh`` script when you create a PR. If you are adding new code examples,
ensure they work and pass tests before creating the PR.

Ensure that all code examples begin with a ``pragma`` version that spans the largest where the contract code is valid.
For example ``pragma solidity >=0.4.0 <0.7.0;``.

Running Documentation Tests
---------------------------

Make sure your contributions pass our documentation tests by running ``./scripts/docs.sh`` that installs dependencies
needed for documentation and checks for any problems such as broken links or syntax issues.
